# 8.4  Please create an IRAC Case Analysis for Section 8-8af: Case 8.4 – Taylor v City of Saginaw. Please format it like in the provided example, “Copy of Copy of IRAC -  Example.pdf”.
8-8a
Fourth Amendment Rights for Businesses
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution provides that “the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated.” This amendment protects individual privacy by preventing unreasonable searches and seizures. Before a government agency can seize the property of individuals or businesses, it must obtain a valid search warrant—or have an applicable exception to the warrant requirement—which must be issued by a judge or magistrate and be based on probable cause. In other words, authorities must have good reason to believe that instruments or evidence of a crime are present at the business location to be searched.
A warrant is required only when there is an expectation of privacy in the area being searched. For example, you have an expectation of privacy in the garbage in your garbage can when it is in your house. However, once you move that garbage can onto the public sidewalk for pickup, you no longer have the expectation of privacy because you have left your garbage out in plain view of the public. Many challenges to search warrants involve determining whether there was an expectation of privacy. In Kyllo v United States, 533 U.S. 27 (2001), the court dealt with a Fourth Amendment issue of agents using an Agema Thermovision to scan for heat on Danny Kyllo’s triplex at 3:20 a.m. to determine whether the heat emissions were unusual and therefore consistent with using heat lamps for growing marijuana. In other words, was Mr. Kyllo entitled to privacy from street scanners used on his home?
The scan showed that the roof over the garage and a side wall of Mr. Kyllo’s home were relatively hot compared to the rest of the home and substantially warmer than neighboring homes in the triplex. Based on tips from informants, utility bills, and the thermal imaging, a federal magistrate judge issued a warrant authorizing a search of Mr. Kyllo’s home, and the agents found an indoor growing operation involving more than 100 plants. Mr. Kyllo was indicted on one count of manufacturing marijuana.
The court held that there was a physical intrusion by the agents because they used sense-enhancing technology to obtain evidence that could not otherwise have been obtained without physical “intrusion into a constitutionally protected area”—Mr. Kyllo’s home.
Another area of physical intrusion that has resulted in a significant number of Fourth Amendment challenges is with regard to vehicles. Questions include when they can be searched, when a warrant is necessary, and whether marking vehicles is a search. The Taylor v City of Saginaw case (Case 8.4) examines the warrant requirement for the common practice of chalking tires for parking enforcement.
Case 8.4
Chalking Tires for Parking Enforcement and the Fourth Amendment
Taylor v City of Saginaw
922 F.3d 328 (6th Cir. 2019)
Facts
The City of Saginaw (City) uses a common parking enforcement practice known as “chalking.” City parking enforcement officers use chalk to mark the tires of parked vehicles to track how long they have been parked. Parking enforcement officers return to the car after the posted time for parking has passed, and if the chalk marks are still there—a sign that the vehicle has not moved—the officer issues a citation. Between 2014 and 2017, Tabitha Hoskins chalked Taylor’s tires on 15 separate occasions and issued her citations. Each citation included the date and time the chalk was placed on her vehicle’s tires. The cost of a citation starts at $15 and increases from there.
Ms. Taylor sued the City and its parking enforcement officer, Tabitha Hoskins, alleging that chalking her tires without her consent constituted an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment.
Decision Below
The district court granted the City’s motion to dismiss, finding that, while chalking may have constituted a search under the Fourth Amendment, the search was reasonable. Ms. Taylor appealed.
Judicial Opinion
To determine whether a Fourth Amendment violation has occurred, we ask two primary questions: first, whether the alleged government conduct constitutes a search within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment; and second, whether the search was reasonable.
The answer to the first question is yes, chalking is a search for Fourth Amendment purposes. The Supreme Court has articulated two distinct approaches to determine when conduct by a governmental agent constitutes a search. Under the most prevalent and widely used search analysis articulated in Katz v. United States, a search occurs when a government official invades as area in which “a person has a constitutionally protected reasonable expectation of privacy.”
In recent years, however, the Supreme Court revisited the seldom used “property-based” approach to the Fourth Amendment search inquiry in United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400, 132 S.Ct. 945, 181 L.Ed.2d 911 (2012). Under Jones, when governmental invasions are accompanied by physical intrusions, a search occurs when the government: (1) trespasses upon a constitutionally protected area, (2) to obtain information.
In Jones, the government surreptitiously attached a GPS device to a car to track the car’s movements. The Supreme Court held that the government’s trespass upon an effect—the vehicle—to obtain information related to the car’s movement was a search. For our purposes, Jones provides the appropriate analytical framework for determining whether chalking constitutes a search within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.
In accordance with Jones, the threshold question is whether chalking constitutes common-law trespass upon a constitutionally protected area. Though Jones does not provide clear boundaries for the meaning of common-law trespass, the Restatement offers some assistance. As defined by the Restatement, common-law trespass is “an act which brings [about] intended physical contact with a chattel in the possession of another.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 217 cmt. e (1965). Adopting this definition, there has been a trespass in this case because the City made intentional physical contact with Taylor’s vehicle. As the district court properly found, this physical intrusion, regardless of how slight, constitutes common-law trespass. [O]nce we determine the government has trespassed upon a constitutionally protected area, we must then determine whether the trespass was “conjoined with … an attempt to find something or to obtain information.” Here, it was. Neither party disputes that the City uses the chalk marks for the purpose of identifying vehicles that have been parked in the same location for a certain period of time. That information is then used by the City to issue citations. As the district court aptly noted, “[d]espite the low-tech nature of the investigative technique …, the chalk marks clearly provided information to Hoskins.”
The City [argues] that, even if chalking is a search under Jones, the search was reasonable because there is a reduced expectation of privacy in an automobile. The City further contends that the search was subject to the community caretaker exception.
The district court found that the City’s warrantless search of Taylor’s vehicle was reasonable because there is a lesser expectation of privacy with automobiles. We disagree. Though an automobile enjoys a “reduced expectation [ ] of privacy” due to its “ready mobility,” we explained that this diminished expectation of privacy is what justified the automobile exception to the warrant requirement. The automobile exception permits officers to search a vehicle without a warrant if they have “probable cause to believe that the vehicle contains evidence of a crime.” No such probable cause existed here. Thus, the automobile exception is inapplicable.
Next, the City attempts to seek refuge in the community caretaker exception. This exception applies “whe[n] … government actors [are] performing ‘community-caretaker’ functions rather than traditional law-enforcement functions.” Unlike other exceptions, it requires that we “look at the function performed by a [government agent]” when a search occurs. To apply, this function must be “totally divorced from the detection, investigation, or acquisition of evidence relating to the violation of a criminal statute.”
This exception has its genesis in the Supreme Court’s decision in Cady v. Dombrowski. There, the defendant’s vehicle was disabled as a result of an accident and left on the side of the road following his arrest for drunk-driving. Pursuant to “standard procedure,” police officers conducted a search of the defendant’s vehicle to retrieve a revolver reasonably suspected of being in the trunk. The Court found the search was reasonable, as it was “to protect the public from the possibility that a revolver would fall into untrained or perhaps malicious hands.”
The City fails to carry its burden of establishing that the community caretaker exception applies in this instance. First, on these facts, the City fails to demonstrate how this search bears a relation to public safety. The City does not show that the location or length of time that Taylor’s vehicle was parked created the type of “hazard” or traffic impediment amounting to a public safety concern. Nor does the City demonstrate that delaying a search would result in “injury or ongoing harm to the community.” To the contrary, at the time of the search, Taylor’s vehicle was lawfully parked in a proper parking location, imposing no safety risk whatsoever. Because the purpose of chalking is to raise revenue, and not to mitigate public hazard, the City was not acting in its “role as [a] community caretake[.]”
The City points to the importance of “maintaining efficient, orderly parking.” While the City is entitled to maintain efficient, orderly parking, the manner in which it chooses to do so is not without constitutional limitation. As the Supreme Court explains, “the [Fourth] Amendment does not place an unduly oppressive weight on [the government] but merely … an orderly procedure….”
The City does not demonstrate, in law or logic, that the need to deter drivers from exceeding the time permitted for parking—before they have even done so—is sufficient to justify a warrantless search under the community caretaker rationale.
[We] hold that chalking is a search under the Fourth Amendment.
Reversed and remanded.
Case Questions
Is touching a car without consent or a warrant an invasion of privacy?
What is the community exception to the warrant requirement and when does it apply?
What will the city need to do now to enforce its parking time limits?
Consider … 8.6
Using what you have learned in the Taylor v City of Saginaw case, solve the opening Consider 8.1 problem. Did Officer Rhodes violate the Fourth Amendment protections of Ryan Collins? What would be the result if the motorcycle were sitting in the driveway without a cover? Could the officer have properly run a check on the motorcycle? If the evidence cannot be used, what happens to the conviction of Collins? [Collins v Virginia, 138 S.Ct. 1663 (2018)]
The Fourth Amendment applies equally to individuals and corporations. In an unauthorized search, a corporation’s property is given the same protection. For example, in Dow Chemical Co. v United States, 476 U.S. 1819 (1986), Dow Chemical challenged the admission of photos of one of its sites taken from low-flying aircraft. However, the U.S. Supreme Court held that a company does not have a right of privacy from low-flying planes of its production facilities. Pictures taken from the airplanes of plant operations were not a violation of privacy.
If an improper search is conducted, any evidence recovered is inadmissible at trial for the purposes of proving the crime.

